---
layout: post
title: "OSCON 2010 Redux"
date: 2010-07-25T16:08:00

uniqid: 0f320370-ff04-4a23-b36e-0749aa88a818
categories: 
 - OSCON
 - Gimli
---
<p>
	Another OSCON is done.  As usual, it was a great mix of folks and ideas
	across many different areas of OpenSource technology.
</p>
<p>
	The most valuable track at these conferences (for me, at least) has become
	the hallway track.  This is due in-part to my becoming a big-headed
	know-it-all; you pick up a lot of knowledge after you been to a good number
	of these conferences/conventions.  But it is really important to me to be
	able to converse with fellow OpenSourcerors, whether they are working on
	the tools that I use on a daily basis or are working on something outside
	of my familiar tool box.
</p>
<p>
	I like to think of OSCON as a melting pot for OpenSource; an excellent
	opportunity for cross-pollination between projects.
</p>
<p>
	A particularly interesting development at OSCON this year was the
	announcement of a new Distributed Version Control System, under the Apache
	License (v2); it is called <a
	href="http://www.sourcegear.com/veracity/">Veracity</a> and is the product
	of SourceGear, LLC.  This is interesting for me for a couple of reasons;
	the first is the license (wouldn't it be cool to embed DVCS to keep track
	of configuration information?), and the second is the feature set; they
	provide everything from source control through to distributed issue
	tracking.  Veracity isn't done yet, but I'll be keeping an eye on it.
</p>
<p>
	I'm also pleased to have shared Gimli at OSCON.  Gimli is a crash tracing
	and analysis framework that provides watchdog and tracing support for
	Linux, Solaris and Darwin (OS/X) systems.  You can <a
	href="http://www.slideshare.net/wezfurlong/gimli-server-process-monitoring-and-fault-analysis">find
	my slides on slideshare</a> and <a
	href="https://bitbucket.org/wez/gimli">find the Gimli project on
	bitbucket</a>.
</p>
<p>
	It was great to be at OSCON this year, especially with it being back in
	Portland, and I look forward to returning next year.
</p>
