---
layout: resume
title: Wez Furlong, Resume
---

An exceptional software engineer with 13 years of experience with all
aspects of the software development lifecycle.  Great breadth and depth
of experience with a wide range of technologies.  A great mentor and
leader and well-liked by the rest of the team.  Open Source developer
and public speaker whose software powers web and messaging
infrastructure across the entire internet.

**Objective:** To play a leading role in the design, vision and
implementation of world-class, innovative and excellent software.

## Skills & Technologies

All of these can be classified as being mastered through to competent in
level of expertise and/or familiarity.

 * C/C++, Lua, PHP, Perl, Objective-C, XML, HTML, CSS, Javascript, Java,
   shell scripting.
 * DWARF debugging information, ELF loader format, stack unwinding and
   tracing, compiler construction and VM implementation (lex, yacc, lemon, re2c)
 * Extending C/C++ applications with Lua, PHP, Perl, Java.
 * Oracle OCI, ODBC, PostgreSQL, SQLite, mySQL and other database vendor client
   library integrations.
 * BSD and WinSock2 network programming. Protocols: SMTP, HTTP, POP3, IMAP4,
   XMPP/Jabber.
 * Linux, Solaris, Darwin (OS/X), FreeBSD and Windows: development and
   administration.

## Experience

<br/>

### Chief Software Architect, Director of Software Engineering
#### Message Systems, Inc., Columbia MD
#### Jan 2010 - present

Responsible for strategic technology issues for the Message Systems
product line.  Ran the Research and Development program.  Set standards
for development practice, architecture and design.  Mentor for the
engineering group (25 people including development and QA).

Responsible for the development output of the organization.  Managed a
team of 14 developers and a handful of "nearsourced" developers.

Implemented a multi-thread safe Lua runtime featuring a concurrent,
generational garbage collector.

### Director of Engineering
#### Message Systems, Inc., Columbia MD
#### Jan 2008 - Dec 2009

Responsible for the development output of the organization.  Introduced
the Scrum agile development methodology to facilitate regular and
predictable build cycles.  Managed 12 developers working across 6
product lines.  Responsible for hiring and firing,
design/architecture/code review, planning and scheduling, mentoring and
otherwise making sure that the developers are working smoothly.

Designed and implemented a Lua extensibility SDK exposing autogenerated
bindings that enabled Lua closures to be passed as "C" callback function
pointers, a transactional hierarchical configuration system that allowed
for significant configuration changes to be made without restarting the
server process and a "Grand Unified Packaging System" that made it
very easy to produce binary software packages across multiple
operating systems and architectures.

### Lead Engineer
#### OmniTI, Inc., Columbia, MD
#### Nov 2004 - Dec 2007

Work on the messaging products in the internal division that would later
be spun out as Message Systems, Inc.  Primary focus was product
development, creating a novel implementation of the Sieve language,
porting and standardizing on the Solaris "umem" allocator, improved
build system, docbook based documentation system, a data-source
abstraction layer with integrated query results cache, a novel hook
extension system and more.  I also filled the role of Sales Engineer and
Support Engineer in the early bootstrap days.

### PHP Core Developer
#### Open Source
#### Since 2001

Numerous contributions to the core of the PHP programming language.
Architect of the Streams internals (shipped in PHP 4.3), the PDO
Database abstraction layer (shipped in PHP 5.1) and responsible for a
large number of extensions including SQLite, mailparse, OpenSSL,
COM/.Net, a flexible build tool chain for Windows and many others.

First community leader for the PHP Extension building community (known
as PECL), with a successful mission to help foster and grow that
community by providing project development facilities, news and
programming resources.

### Owner and CTO
#### The Brain Room Ltd., England
#### 2000-2004

A micro-consultancy that I co-owned with my wife, a seasoned graphic
designer.  Developed a variety of web applications, the most significant
were two large contracts in Japan and Australia.

Designed and implemented an e-learning system and courseware authoring
package implemented as a PHP web app with a Windows based authoring tool
(implemented with Delphi), and a web based productivity suite which can
be succintly described as being a bit like Google Apps but with a focus
on project planning, workflow and email.  This system included a
proprietary SMTP daemon and a novel VNC proxy server to provide WebEx
style screen sharing.

### Systems Programmer
#### Ryland Technology Ltd., England
#### 1998-2000

Distributed application development in a Windows environment using DCOM.
Custom web apllication development using ASP (classic), ISAPI, DHTML, MS
Access and MS SQL Server in a Windows environment.
Windows development using Microsoft Visual C++ and Delphi.

## Conferences and Publications

 * Frequent speaker and educator at PHP and Open Source conferences, having
   delivered 40 sessions at more than 25 difference conferences worldwide.
   [Full list of presentations](http://wezfurlong.org/publications/).
 * Authored a number of articles on PHP and related technologies for IBM
   DeveloperWorks, Oracle Technology Network, PHP Architect and International
   PHP Magazine.
 * Authored (uncredited) content for O'Reilly Media's "Programming PHP, 2nd
   Edition" and "PHP Cookbook, 2nd Edition".

## Education

BEng, Electronic Systems Engineering.  
The University of York, England.

## Notable Achievements

 * Author and co-inventor of pending US Patent "Method and System for
   Adaptive Delivery of Digital Messages", filed April 2011.
 * Oracle Magazine's PHP Developer of the Year 2005.
 * Various Open Source projects can be found in
   [my curated list of projects](http://wezfurlong.org/projects).

